CHAPTER XVI

OF GLORY

There is the name and the thing: the name is a voice which denotes and signifies
the thing; the name is no part of the thing, nor of the substance; 'tis a
foreign piece joined to the thing, and outside it. God, who is all fulness in
Himself and the height of all perfection, cannot augment or add anything to
Himself within; but His name may be augmented and increased by the blessing and
praise we attribute to His exterior works: which praise, seeing we cannot
incorporate it in Him, forasmuch as He can have no accession of good, we
attribute to His name, which is the part out of Him that is nearest to us. Thus
is it that to God alone glory and honour appertain; and there is nothing so
remote from reason as that we should go in quest of it for ourselves; for, being
indigent and necessitous within, our essence being imperfect, and having
continual need of amelioration, 'tis to that we ought to employ all our
endeavour. We are all hollow and empty; 'tis not with wind and voice that we are
to fill ourselves; we want a more solid substance to repair us: a man starving
with hunger would be very simple to seek rather to provide himself with a gay
garment than with a good meal: we are to look after that whereof we have most
need. As we have it in our ordinary prayers:

          "Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus."

We are in want of beauty, health, wisdom, virtue, and such like essential
qualities: exterior ornaments should, be looked after when we have made
provision for necessary things. Divinity treats amply and more pertinently of
this subject, but I am not much versed in it.

Chrysippus and Diogenes were the earliest and firmest advocates of the contempt
of glory; and maintained that, amongst all pleasures, there was none more
dangerous nor more to be avoided than that which proceeds from the approbation
of others. And, in truth, experience makes us sensible of many very hurtful
treasons in it. There is nothing that so poisons princes as flattery, nor
anything whereby wicked men more easily obtain credit and favour with them; nor
panderism so apt and so usually made use of to corrupt the chastity of women as
to wheedle and entertain them with their own praises. The first charm the Syrens
made use of to allure Ulysses is of this nature:

          "Deca vers nous, deca, o tres-louable Ulysse, Et le plus grand honneur
          don't la Grece fleurisse."

     ["Come hither to us, O admirable Ulysses, come hither, thou greatest
     ornament and pride of Greece."--Homer, Odysseus, xii. 184.]

These philosophers said, that all the glory of the world was not worth an
understanding man's holding out his finger to obtain it:

 "Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum est?"

["What is glory, be it as glorious as it may be, if it be no more than
glory?"--Juvenal, Sat., vii. 81.]

I say for it alone; for it often brings several commodities along with it, for
which it may justly be desired: it acquires us good-will, and renders us less
subject and exposed to insult and offence from others, and the like. It was also
one of the principal doctrines of Epicurus; for this precept of his sect,
Conceal thy life, that forbids men to encumber themselves with public
negotiations and offices, also necessarily presupposes a contempt of glory,
which is the world's approbation of those actions we produce in
public.--[Plutarch, Whether the saying, Conceal thy life, is well said.]--He
that bids us conceal ourselves, and to have no other concern but for ourselves,
and who will not have us known to others, would much less have us honoured and
glorified; and so advises Idomeneus not in any sort to regulate his actions by
the common reputation or opinion, except so as to avoid the other accidental
inconveniences that the contempt of men might bring upon him.

These discourses are, in my opinion, very true and rational; but we are, I know
not how, double in ourselves, which is the cause that what we believe we do not
believe, and cannot disengage ourselves from what we condemn. Let us see the
last and dying words of Epicurus; they are grand, and worthy of such a
philosopher, and yet they carry some touches of the recommendation of his name
and of that humour he had decried by his precepts. Here is a letter that he
dictated a little before his last gasp:

                              "EPICUYUS TO HEYMACHUS, health.

     "Whilst I was passing over the happy and last day of my life, I write this,
     but, at the same time, afflicted with such pain in my bladder and bowels
     that nothing can be greater, but it was recompensed with the pleasure the
     remembrance of my inventions and doctrines brought to my soul. Now, as the
     affection thou hast ever from thy infancy borne towards me and philosophy
     requires, take upon thee the protection of Metrodorus' children."

This is the letter. And that which makes me interpret that the pleasure he says
he had in his soul concerning his inventions, has some reference to the
reputation he hoped for thence after his death, is the manner of his will, in
which he gives order that Amynomachus and Timocrates, his heirs, should, every
January, defray the expense of the celebration of his birthday as Hermachus
should appoint; and also the expense that should be made the twentieth of every
moon in entertaining the philosophers, his friends, who should assemble in
honour of the memory of him and of Metrodorus.--[Cicero, De Finibus, ii. 30.]

Carneades was head of the contrary opinion, and maintained that glory was to be
desired for itself, even as we embrace our posthumous issue for themselves,
having no knowledge nor enjoyment of them. This opinion has not failed to be the
more universally followed, as those commonly are that are most suitable to our
inclinations. Aristotle gives it the first place amongst external goods; and
avoids, as too extreme vices, the immoderate either seeking or evading it. I
believe that, if we had the books Cicero wrote upon this subject, we should
there find pretty stories; for he was so possessed with this passion, that, if
he had dared, I think he could willingly have fallen into the excess that others
did, that virtue itself was not to be coveted, but upon the account of the
honour that always attends it:

                              "Paulum sepultae distat inertiae Celata virtus:"

                    ["Virtue concealed little differs from dead sloth."
                    --Horace, Od., iv. 9, 29.]

which is an opinion so false, that I am vexed it could ever enter into the
understanding of a man that was honoured with the name of philosopher.

If this were true, men need not be virtuous but in public; and we should be no
further concerned to keep the operations of the soul, which is the true seat of
virtue, regular and in order, than as they are to arrive at the knowledge of
others. Is there no more in it, then, but only slily and with circumspection to
do ill? "If thou knowest," says Carneades, "of a serpent lurking in a place
where, without suspicion, a person is going to sit down, by whose death thou
expectest an advantage, thou dost ill if thou dost not give him caution of his
danger; and so much the more because the action is to be known by none but
thyself." If we do not take up of ourselves the rule of well-doing, if impunity
pass with us for justice, to how many sorts of wickedness shall we every day
abandon ourselves? I do not find what Sextus Peduceus did, in faithfully
restoring the treasure that C. Plotius had committed to his sole secrecy and
trust, a thing that I have often done myself, so commendable, as I should think
it an execrable baseness, had we done otherwise; and I think it of good use in
our days to recall the example of P. Sextilius Rufus, whom Cicero accuses to
have entered upon an inheritance contrary to his conscience, not only not
against law, but even by the determination of the laws themselves; and M.
Crassus and Hortensius, who, by reason of their authority and power, having been
called in by a stranger to share in the succession of a forged will, that so he
might secure his own part, satisfied themselves with having no hand in the
forgery, and refused not to make their advantage and to come in for a share:
secure enough, if they could shroud themselves from accusations, witnesses, and
the cognisance of the laws:

          "Meminerint Deum se habere testem, id est (ut ego arbitror) mentem
          suam."

     ["Let them consider they have God to witness, that is (as I interpret it),
     their own consciences."--Cicero, De Offic., iii. 10.]

Virtue is a very vain and frivolous thing if it derive its recommendation from
glory; and 'tis to no purpose that we endeavour to give it a station by itself,
and separate it from fortune; for what is more accidental than reputation?

     "Profecto fortuna in omni re dominatur: ea res cunctas ex libidine magis,
     quhm ex vero, celebrat, obscuratque."

     ["Fortune rules in all things; it advances and depresses things more out of
     its own will than of right and justice." --Sallust, Catilina, c. 8.]

So to order it that actions may be known and seen is purely the work of fortune;
'tis chance that helps us to glory, according to its own temerity. I have often
seen her go before merit, and often very much outstrip it. He who first likened
glory to a shadow did better than he was aware of; they are both of them things
pre-eminently vain glory also, like a shadow, goes sometimes before the body,
and sometimes in length infinitely exceeds it. They who instruct gentlemen only
to employ their valour for the obtaining of honour:

          "Quasi non sit honestum, quod nobilitatum non sit;"

          ["As though it were not a virtue, unless celebrated" --Cicero De
          Offic. iii. 10.]

what do they intend by that but to instruct them never to hazard themselves if
they are not seen, and to observe well if there be witnesses present who may
carry news of their valour, whereas a thousand occasions of well-doing present
themselves which cannot be taken notice of? How many brave individual actions
are buried in the crowd of a battle? Whoever shall take upon him to watch
another's behaviour in such a confusion is not very busy himself, and the
testimony he shall give of his companions' deportment will be evidence against
himself:

          "Vera et sapiens animi magnitudo, honestum illud, quod maxime naturam
          sequitur, in factis positum, non in gloria, judicat."

     ["The true and wise magnanimity judges that the bravery which most follows
     nature more consists in act than glory." --Cicero, De Offic. i. 19.]

All the glory that I pretend to derive from my life is that I have lived it in
quiet; in quiet, not according to Metrodorus, or Arcesilaus, or Aristippus, but
according to myself. For seeing philosophy has not been able to find out any way
to tranquillity that is good in common, let every one seek it in particular.

To what do Caesar and Alexander owe the infinite grandeur of their renown but to
fortune? How many men has she extinguished in the beginning of their progress,
of whom we have no knowledge, who brought as much courage to the work as they,
if their adverse hap had not cut them off in the first sally of their arms?
Amongst so many and so great dangers I do not remember I have anywhere read that
Caesar was ever wounded; a thousand have fallen in less dangers than the least
of those he went through. An infinite number of brave actions must be performed
without witness and lost, before one turns to account. A man is not always on
the top of a breach, or at the head of an army, in the sight of his general, as
upon a scaffold; a man is often surprised betwixt the hedge and the ditch; he
must run the hazard of his life against a henroost; he must dislodge four
rascally musketeers out of a barn; he must prick out single from his party, and
alone make some attempts, according as necessity will have it. And whoever will
observe will, I believe, find it experimentally true, that occasions of the
least lustre are ever the most dangerous; and that in the wars of our own times
there have more brave men been lost in occasions of little moment, and in the
dispute about some little paltry fort, than in places of greatest importance,
and where their valour might have been more honourably employed.

Who thinks his death achieved to ill purpose if he do not fall on some signal
occasion, instead of illustrating his death, wilfully obscures his life,
suffering in the meantime many very just occasions of hazarding himself to slip
out of his hands; and every just one is illustrious enough, every man's
conscience being a sufficient trumpet to him.

          "Gloria nostra est testimonium conscientiae nostrae."

     ["For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience."
     --Corinthians, i. I.]

He who is only a good man that men may know it, and that he may be the better
esteemed when 'tis known; who will not do well but upon condition that his
virtue may be known to men: is one from whom much service is not to be expected:

              "Credo ch 'el reste di quel verno, cose
               Facesse degne di tener ne conto;
               Ma fur fin' a quel tempo si nascose,
               Che non a colpa mia s' hor 'non le conto
               Perche Orlando a far l'opre virtuose
               Piu ch'a narrar le poi sempre era pronto;
               Ne mai fu alcun' de'suoi fatti espresso,
               Se non quando ebbe i testimonii appresso."

     ["The rest of the winter, I believe, was spent in actions worthy of
     narration, but they were done so secretly that if I do not tell them I am
     not to blame, for Orlando was more bent to do great acts than to boast of
     them, so that no deeds of his were ever known but those that had
     witnesses."--Ariosto, Orlando Furioso, xi. 81.]

A man must go to the war upon the account of duty, and expect the recompense
that never fails brave and worthy actions, how private soever, or even virtuous
thoughts-the satisfaction that a well-disposed conscience receives in itself in
doing well. A man must be valiant for himself, and upon account of the advantage
it is to him to have his courage seated in a firm and secure place against the
assaults of fortune:

                   "Virtus, repulsaa nescia sordidx
                    Intaminatis fulget honoribus
                    Nec sumit, aut ponit secures
                    Arbitrio popularis aura."

     ["Virtue, repudiating all base repulse, shines in taintless honours, nor
     takes nor leaves dignity at the mere will of the vulgar."--Horace, Od.,
     iii. 2, 17.]

It is not for outward show that the soul is to play its part, but for ourselves
within, where no eyes can pierce but our own; there she defends us from the fear
of death, of pain, of shame itself: there she arms us against the loss of our
children, friends, and fortunes: and when opportunity presents itself, she leads
us on to the hazards of war:

          "Non emolumento aliquo, sed ipsius honestatis decore."

     ["Not for any profit, but for the honour of honesty itself." --Cicero, De
     Finib., i. 10.]

This profit is of much greater advantage, and more worthy to be coveted and
hoped for, than, honour and glory, which are no other than a favourable judgment
given of us.

A dozen men must be called out of a whole nation to judge about an acre of land;
and the judgment of our inclinations and actions, the most difficult and most
important matter that is, we refer to the voice and determination of the rabble,
the mother of ignorance, injustice, and inconstancy. Is it reasonable that the
life of a wise man should depend upon the judgment of fools?

          "An quidquam stultius, quam, quos singulos contemnas, eos aliquid
          putare esse universes?"

     ["Can anything be more foolish than to think that those you despise singly,
     can be anything else in general." --Cicero, Tusc. Quaes., v. 36.]

He that makes it his business to please them, will have enough to do and never
have done; 'tis a mark that can never be aimed at or hit:

          "Nil tam inaestimabile est, quam animi multitudinis."

     ["Nothing is to be so little understood as the minds of the
     multitude."--Livy, xxxi. 34.]

Demetrius pleasantly said of the voice of the people, that he made no more
account of that which came from above than of that which came from below. He
[Cicero] says more:

          "Ego hoc judico, si quando turpe non sit, tamen non esse non turpe,
          quum id a multitudine laudatur."

     ["I am of opinion, that though a thing be not foul in itself, yet it cannot
     but become so when commended by the multitude." --Cicero, De Finib., ii.
     15.]

No art, no activity of wit, could conduct our steps so as to follow so wandering
and so irregular a guide; in this windy confusion of the noise of vulgar reports
and opinions that drive us on, no way worth anything can be chosen. Let us not
propose to ourselves so floating and wavering an end; let us follow constantly
after reason; let the public approbation follow us there, if it will; and as it
wholly depends upon fortune, we have no reason sooner to expect it by any other
way than that. Even though I would not follow the right way because it is right,
I should, however, follow it as having experimentally found that, at the end of
the reckoning, 'tis commonly the most happy and of greatest utility.

          "Dedit hoc providentia hominibus munus, ut honesta magis juvarent."

     ["This gift Providence has given to men, that honest things should be the
     most agreeable."--Quintilian, Inst. Orat., i. 12.]

The mariner of old said thus to Neptune, in a great tempest: "O God, thou wilt
save me if thou wilt, and if thou choosest, thou wilt destroy me; but, however,
I will hold my rudder straight."--[Seneca, Ep., 85.]-- I have seen in my time a
thousand men supple, halfbred, ambiguous, whom no one doubted to be more
worldly-wise than I, lose themselves, where I have saved myself:

          "Risi successus posse carere dolos."

     ["I have laughed to see cunning fail of success." --Ovid, Heroid, i. 18.]

Paulus AEmilius, going on the glorious expedition of Macedonia, above all things
charged the people of Rome not to speak of his actions during his absence. Oh,
the license of judgments is a great disturbance to great affairs! forasmuch as
every one has not the firmness of Fabius against common, adverse, and injurious
tongues, who rather suffered his authority to be dissected by the vain fancies
of men, than to do less well in his charge with a favourable reputation and the
popular applause.

There is I know not what natural sweetness in hearing one's self commended; but
we are a great deal too fond of it:

          "Laudari metuam, neque enim mihi cornea fibra est Sed recti finemque
          extremumque esse recuso Euge tuum, et belle."

     ["I should fear to be praised, for my heart is not made of horn; but I deny
     that 'excellent--admirably done,' are the terms and final aim of
     virtue."--Persius, i. 47.]

I care not so much what I am in the opinions of others, as what I am in my own;
I would be rich of myself, and not by borrowing. Strangers see nothing but
events and outward appearances; everybody can set a good face on the matter,
when they have trembling and terror within: they do not see my heart, they see
but my countenance. One is right in decrying the hypocrisy that is in war; for
what is more easy to an old soldier than to shift in a time of danger, and to
counterfeit the brave when he has no more heart than a chicken? There are so
many ways to avoid hazarding a man's own person, that we have deceived the world
a thousand times before we come to be engaged in a real danger: and even then,
finding ourselves in an inevitable necessity of doing something, we can make
shift for that time to conceal our apprehensions by setting a good face on the
business, though the heart beats within; and whoever had the use of the Platonic
ring, which renders those invisible that wear it, if turned inward towards the
palm of the hand, a great many would very often hide themselves when they ought
most to appear, and would repent being placed in so honourable a post, where
necessity must make them bold.

          "Falsus honor juvat, et mendax infamia terret Quem nisi mendosum et
          mendacem?"

     ["False honour pleases, and calumny affrights, the guilty and the
     sick."--Horace, Ep., i. 16, 89.]

Thus we see how all the judgments that are founded upon external appearances,
are marvellously uncertain and doubtful; and that there is no so certain
testimony as every one is to himself. In these, how many soldiers' boys are
companions of our glory? he who stands firm in an open trench, what does he in
that more than fifty poor pioneers who open to him the way and cover it with
their own bodies for fivepence a day pay, do before him?

          "Non quicquid turbida Roma Elevet, accedas; examenque improbum in illa
          Castiges trutina: nec to quaesiveris extra."

     ["Do not, if turbulent Rome disparage anything, accede; nor correct a false
     balance by that scale; nor seek anything beyond thyself." --Persius, Sat.,
     i. 5.]

The dispersing and scattering our names into many mouths, we call making them
more great; we will have them there well received, and that this increase turn
to their advantage, which is all that can be excusable in this design. But the
excess of this disease proceeds so far that many covet to have a name, be it
what it will. Trogus Pompeius says of Herostratus, and Titus Livius of Manlius
Capitolinus, that they were more ambitious of a great reputation than of a good
one. This is very common; we are more solicitous that men speak of us, than how
they speak; and it is enough for us that our names are often mentioned, be it
after what manner it will. It should seem that to be known, is in some sort to
have a man's life and its duration in others' keeping. I, for my part, hold that
I am not, but in myself; and of that other life of mine which lies in the
knowledge of my friends, to consider it naked and simply in itself, I know very
well that I am sensible of no fruit nor enjoyment from it but by the vanity of a
fantastic opinion; and when I shall be dead, I shall be still and much less
sensible of it; and shall, withal, absolutely lose the use of those real
advantages that sometimes accidentally follow it.

I shall have no more handle whereby to take hold of reputation, neither shall it
have any whereby to take hold of or to cleave to me; for to expect that my name
should be advanced by it, in the first place, I have no name that is enough my
own; of two that I have, one is common to all my race, and indeed to others
also; there are two families at Paris and Montpellier, whose surname is
Montaigne, another in Brittany, and one in Xaintonge, De La Montaigne. The
transposition of one syllable only would suffice so to ravel our affairs, that I
shall share in their glory, and they peradventure will partake of my discredit;
and, moreover, my ancestors have formerly been surnamed, Eyquem,--[Eyquem was
the patronymic.]--a name wherein a family well known in England is at this day
concerned. As to my other name, every one may take it that will, and so,
perhaps, I may honour a porter in my own stead. And besides, though I had a
particular distinction by myself, what can it distinguish, when I am no more?
Can it point out and favour inanity?

          "Non levior cippus nunc imprimit ossa? Laudat posteritas! Nunc non e
          manibus illis, Nunc non a tumulo fortunataque favilla, Nascentur
          violae?"

     ["Does the tomb press with less weight upon my bones? Do comrades praise?
     Not from my manes, not from the tomb, not from the ashes will violets
     grow."--Persius, Sat., i. 37.]

but of this I have spoken elsewhere. As to what remains, in a great battle where
ten thousand men are maimed or killed, there are not fifteen who are taken
notice of; it must be some very eminent greatness, or some consequence of great
importance that fortune has added to it, that signalises a private action, not
of a harquebuser only, but of a great captain; for to kill a man, or two, or
ten: to expose a man's self bravely to the utmost peril of death, is indeed
something in every one of us, because we there hazard all; but for the world's
concern, they are things so ordinary, and so many of them are every day seen,
and there must of necessity be so many of the same kind to produce any notable
effect, that we cannot expect any particular renown from it:

          "Casus multis hic cognitus, ac jam Tritus, et a medio fortunae ductus
          acervo."

     ["The accident is known to many, and now trite; and drawn from the midst of
     Fortune's heap."--Juvenal, Sat., xiii. 9.]

Of so many thousands of valiant men who have died within these fifteen hundred
years in France with their swords in their hands, not a hundred have come to our
knowledge. The memory, not of the commanders only, but of battles and victories,
is buried and gone; the fortunes of above half of the world, for want of a
record, stir not from their place, and vanish without duration. If I had unknown
events in my possession, I should think with great ease to out-do those that are
recorded, in all sorts of examples. Is it not strange that even of the Greeks
and Romans, with so many writers and witnesses, and so many rare and noble
exploits, so few are arrived at our knowledge:

          "Ad nos vix tenuis famx perlabitur aura."

     ["An obscure rumour scarce is hither come."--AEneid, vii. 646.]

It will be much if, a hundred years hence, it be remembered in general that in
our times there were civil wars in France. The Lacedaemonians, entering into
battle, sacrificed to the Muses, to the end that their actions might be well and
worthily written, looking upon it as a divine and no common favour, that brave
acts should find witnesses that could give them life and memory. Do we expect
that at every musket-shot we receive, and at every hazard we run, there must be
a register ready to record it? and, besides, a hundred registers may enrol them
whose commentaries will not last above three days, and will never come to the
sight of any one. We have not the thousandth part of ancient writings; 'tis
fortune that gives them a shorter or longer life, according to her favour; and
'tis permissible to doubt whether those we have be not the worst, not having
seen the rest. Men do not write histories of things of so little moment: a man
must have been general in the conquest of an empire or a kingdom; he must have
won two-and-fifty set battles, and always the weaker in number, as Caesar did:
ten thousand brave fellows and many great captains lost their lives valiantly in
his service, whose names lasted no longer than their wives and children lived:

               "Quos fama obscura recondit."

     ["Whom an obscure reputation conceals."--AEneid, v. 302.]

Even those whom we see behave themselves well, three months or three years after
they have departed hence, are no more mentioned than if they had never been.
Whoever will justly consider, and with due proportion, of what kind of men and
of what sort of actions the glory sustains itself in the records of history,
will find that there are very few actions and very few persons of our times who
can there pretend any right. How many worthy men have we known to survive their
own reputation, who have seen and suffered the honour and glory most justly
acquired in their youth, extinguished in their own presence? And for three years
of this fantastic and imaginary life we must go and throw away our true and
essential life, and engage ourselves in a perpetual death! The sages propose to
themselves a nobler and more just end in so important an enterprise:

          "Recte facti, fecisse merces est: officii fructus, ipsum officium
          est."

     ["The reward of a thing well done is to have done it; the fruit of a good
     service is the service itself."--Seneca, Ep., 8.]

It were, peradventure, excusable in a painter or other artisan, or in a
rhetorician or a grammarian, to endeavour to raise himself a name by his works;
but the actions of virtue are too noble in themselves to seek any other reward
than from their own value, and especially to seek it in the vanity of human
judgments.

If this false opinion, nevertheless, be of such use to the public as to keep men
in their duty; if the people are thereby stirred up to virtue; if princes are
touched to see the world bless the memory of Trajan, and abominate that of Nero;
if it moves them to see the name of that great beast, once so terrible and
feared, so freely cursed and reviled by every schoolboy, let it by all means
increase, and be as much as possible nursed up and cherished amongst us; and
Plato, bending his whole endeavour to make his citizens virtuous, also advises
them not to despise the good repute and esteem of the people; and says it falls
out, by a certain Divine inspiration, that even the wicked themselves oft-times,
as well by word as opinion, can rightly distinguish the virtuous from the
wicked. This person and his tutor are both marvellous and bold artificers
everywhere to add divine operations and revelations where human force is
wanting:

          "Ut tragici poetae confugiunt ad deum, cum explicare argumenti exitum
          non possunt:"

     ["As tragic poets fly to some god when they cannot explain the issue of
     their argument."--Cicero, De Nat. Deor., i. 20.]

and peradventure, for this reason it was that Timon, railing at him, called him
the great forger of miracles. Seeing that men, by their insufficiency, cannot
pay themselves well enough with current money, let the counterfeit be
superadded. 'Tis a way that has been practised by all the legislators: and there
is no government that has not some mixture either of ceremonial vanity or of
false opinion, that serves for a curb to keep the people in their duty. 'Tis for
this that most of them have their originals and beginnings fabulous, and
enriched with supernatural mysteries; 'tis this that has given credit to bastard
religions, and caused them to be countenanced by men of understanding; and for
this, that Numa and Sertorius, to possess their men with a better opinion of
them, fed them with this foppery; one, that the nymph Egeria, the other that his
white hind, brought them all their counsels from the gods. And the authority
that Numa gave to his laws, under the title of the patronage of this goddess,
Zoroaster, legislator of the Bactrians and Persians, gave to his under the name
of the God Oromazis: Trismegistus, legislator of the Egyptians, under that of
Mercury; Xamolxis, legislator of the Scythians, under that of Vesta; Charondas,
legislator of the Chalcidians, under that of Saturn; Minos, legislator of the
Candiots, under that of Jupiter; Lycurgus, legislator of the Lacedaemonians,
under that of Apollo; and Draco and Solon, legislators of the Athenians, under
that of Minerva. And every government has a god at the head of it; the others
falsely, that truly, which Moses set over the Jews at their departure out of
Egypt. The religion of the Bedouins, as the Sire de Joinville reports, amongst
other things, enjoined a belief that the soul of him amongst them who died for
his prince, went into another body more happy, more beautiful, and more robust
than the former; by which means they much more willingly ventured their lives:

          "In ferrum mens prona viris, animaeque capaces Mortis, et ignavum est
          rediturae parcere vitae."

     ["Men's minds are prone to the sword, and their souls able to bear death;
     and it is base to spare a life that will be renewed." --Lucan, i. 461.]

This is a very comfortable belief, however erroneous. Every nation has many such
examples of its own; but this subject would require a treatise by itself.

To add one word more to my former discourse, I would advise the ladies no longer
to call that honour which is but their duty:

          "Ut enim consuetudo loquitur, id solum dicitur honestum, quod est
          populari fama gloriosum;"

     ["As custom puts it, that only is called honest which is glorious by the
     public voice."--Cicero, De Finibus, ii. 15.]

their duty is the mark, their honour but the outward rind. Neither would I
advise them to give this excuse for payment of their denial: for I presuppose
that their intentions, their desire, and will, which are things wherein their
honour is not at all concerned, forasmuch as nothing thereof appears without,
are much better regulated than the effects:

          "Qux quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit:"

     ["She who only refuses, because 'tis forbidden, consents." --Ovid, Amor.,
     ii. 4, 4.]

The offence, both towards God and in the conscience, would be as great to desire
as to do it; and, besides, they are actions so private and secret of themselves,
as would be easily enough kept from the knowledge of others, wherein the honour
consists, if they had not another respect to their duty, and the affection they
bear to chastity, for itself. Every woman of honour will much rather choose to
lose her honour than to hurt her conscience.
