            FIRST ACT


            SCENE

                 Morning-room in Algernon's flat in
                 Half-Moon Street. The room is luxuriously
                 and artistically furnished. The sound of a
                 piano is heard in the adjoining room.

       [Lane is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and
       after the music has ceased, Algernon enters.]

            Algernon. Did you hear what I was playing, Lane?

            Lane. I didn't think it polite to listen, sir.

            Algernon. I'm sorry for that, for your sake. I
            don't play accurately--any one can play
            accurately--but I play with wonderful
            expression. As far as the piano is concerned,
            sentiment is my forte. I keep science for Life.

            Lane. Yes, sir.

            Algernon. And, speaking of the science of Life,
            have you got the cucumber sandwiches cut for
            Lady Bracknell?

            Lane. Yes, sir. [Hands them on a salver.]

            Algernon. [Inspects them, takes two, and sits
            down on the sofa.] Oh! . . . by the way, Lane, I
            see from your book that on Thursday night, when
            Lord Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with
            me, eight bottles of champagne are entered as
            having been consumed.

            Lane. Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.

            Algernon. Why is it that at a bachelor's
            establishment the servants invariably drink the
            champagne? I ask merely for information.

            Lane. I attribute it to the superior quality of
            the wine, sir. I have often observed that in
            married households the champagne is rarely of a
            first-rate brand.

            Algernon. Good heavens! Is marriage so
            demoralising as that?

            Lane. I believe it _is_ a very pleasant state,
            sir. I have had very little experience of it
            myself up to the present. I have only been
            married once. That was in consequence of a
            misunderstanding between myself and a young
            person.

            Algernon. [Languidly_._] I don't know that I am
            much interested in your family life, Lane.

            Lane. No, sir; it is not a very interesting
            subject. I never think of it myself.

            Algernon. Very natural, I am sure. That will do,
            Lane, thank you.

            Lane. Thank you, sir. [Lane goes out.]

            Algernon. Lane's views on marriage seem somewhat
            lax. Really, if the lower orders don't set us a
            good example, what on earth is the use of them?
            They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no
            sense of moral responsibility.

       [Enter Lane.]

            Lane. Mr. Ernest Worthing.

       [Enter Jack.]

       [Lane goes out_._]

            Algernon. How are you, my dear Ernest? What
            brings you up to town?

            Jack. Oh, pleasure, pleasure! What else should
            bring one anywhere? Eating as usual, I see,
            Algy!

            Algernon. [Stiffly_._] I believe it is customary
            in good society to take some slight refreshment
            at five o'clock. Where have you been since last
            Thursday?

            Jack. [Sitting down on the sofa.] In the
            country.

            Algernon. What on earth do you do there?

            Jack. [Pulling off his gloves_._] When one is in
            town one amuses oneself. When one is in the
            country one amuses other people. It is
            excessively boring.

            Algernon. And who are the people you amuse?

            Jack. [Airily_._] Oh, neighbours, neighbours.

            Algernon. Got nice neighbours in your part of
            Shropshire?

            Jack. Perfectly horrid! Never speak to one of
            them.

            Algernon. How immensely you must amuse them!
            [Goes over and takes sandwich.] By the way,
            Shropshire is your county, is it not?

            Jack. Eh? Shropshire? Yes, of course. Hallo! Why
            all these cups? Why cucumber sandwiches? Why
            such reckless extravagance in one so young? Who
            is coming to tea?

            Algernon. Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.

            Jack. How perfectly delightful!

            Algernon. Yes, that is all very well; but I am
            afraid Aunt Augusta won't quite approve of your
            being here.

            Jack. May I ask why?

            Algernon. My dear fellow, the way you flirt with
            Gwendolen is perfectly disgraceful. It is almost
            as bad as the way Gwendolen flirts with you.

            Jack. I am in love with Gwendolen. I have come
            up to town expressly to propose to her.

            Algernon. I thought you had come up for
            pleasure? . . . I call that business.

            Jack. How utterly unromantic you are!

            Algernon. I really don't see anything romantic
            in proposing. It is very romantic to be in love.
            But there is nothing romantic about a definite
            proposal. Why, one may be accepted. One usually
            is, I believe. Then the excitement is all over.
            The very essence of romance is uncertainty. If
            ever I get married, I'll certainly try to forget
            the fact.

            Jack. I have no doubt about that, dear Algy. The
            Divorce Court was specially invented for people
            whose memories are so curiously constituted.

            Algernon. Oh! there is no use speculating on
            that subject. Divorces are made in Heaven--[Jack
            puts out his hand to take a sandwich. Algernon
            at once interferes.] Please don't touch the
            cucumber sandwiches. They are ordered specially
            for Aunt Augusta. [Takes one and eats it.]

            Jack. Well, you have been eating them all the
            time.

            Algernon. That is quite a different matter. She
            is my aunt. [Takes plate from below.] Have some
            bread and butter. The bread and butter is for
            Gwendolen. Gwendolen is devoted to bread and
            butter.

            Jack. [Advancing to table and helping himself.]
            And very good bread and butter it is too.

            Algernon. Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat
            as if you were going to eat it all. You behave
            as if you were married to her already. You are
            not married to her already, and I don't think
            you ever will be.

            Jack. Why on earth do you say that?

            Algernon. Well, in the first place girls never
            marry the men they flirt with. Girls don't think
            it right.

            Jack. Oh, that is nonsense!

            Algernon. It isn't. It is a great truth. It
            accounts for the extraordinary number of
            bachelors that one sees all over the place. In
            the second place, I don't give my consent.

            Jack. Your consent!

            Algernon. My dear fellow, Gwendolen is my first
            cousin. And before I allow you to marry her, you
            will have to clear up the whole question of
            Cecily. [Rings bell.]

            Jack. Cecily! What on earth do you mean? What do
            you mean, Algy, by Cecily! I don't know any one
            of the name of Cecily.

       [Enter Lane.]

            Algernon. Bring me that cigarette case Mr.
            Worthing left in the smoking- room the last time
            he dined here.

            Lane. Yes, sir. [Lane goes out.]

            Jack. Do you mean to say you have had my
            cigarette case all this time? I wish to goodness
            you had let me know. I have been writing frantic
            letters to Scotland Yard about it. I was very
            nearly offering a large reward.

            Algernon. Well, I wish you would offer one. I
            happen to be more than usually hard up.

            Jack. There is no good offering a large reward
            now that the thing is found.

       [Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.
       Algernon takes it at once. Lane goes out.]

            Algernon. I think that is rather mean of you,
            Ernest, I must say. [Opens case and examines
            it.] However, it makes no matter, for, now that
            I look at the inscription inside, I find that
            the thing isn't yours after all.

            Jack. Of course it's mine. [Moving to him.] You
            have seen me with it a hundred times, and you
            have no right whatsoever to read what is written
            inside. It is a very ungentlemanly thing to read
            a private cigarette case.

            Algernon. Oh! it is absurd to have a hard and
            fast rule about what one should read and what
            one shouldn't. More than half of modern culture
            depends on what one shouldn't read.

            Jack. I am quite aware of the fact, and I don't
            propose to discuss modern culture. It isn't the
            sort of thing one should talk of in private. I
            simply want my cigarette case back.

            Algernon. Yes; but this isn't your cigarette
            case. This cigarette case is a present from some
            one of the name of Cecily, and you said you
            didn't know any one of that name.

            Jack. Well, if you want to know, Cecily happens
            to be my aunt.

            Algernon. Your aunt!

            Jack. Yes. Charming old lady she is, too. Lives
            at Tunbridge Wells. Just give it back to me,
            Algy.

            Algernon. [Retreating to back of sofa.] But why
            does she call herself little Cecily if she is
            your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells?
            [Reading.] 'From little Cecily with her fondest
            love.'

            Jack. [Moving to sofa and kneeling upon it.] My
            dear fellow, what on earth is there in that?
            Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall.
            That is a matter that surely an aunt may be
            allowed to decide for herself. You seem to think
            that every aunt should be exactly like your
            aunt! That is absurd! For Heaven's sake give me
            back my cigarette case. [Follows Algernon round
            the room.]

            Algernon. Yes. But why does your aunt call you
            her uncle? 'From little Cecily, with her fondest
            love to her dear Uncle Jack.' There is no
            objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small
            aunt, but why an aunt, no matter what her size
            may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I
            can't quite make out. Besides, your name isn't
            Jack at all; it is Ernest.

            Jack. It isn't Ernest; it's Jack.

            Algernon. You have always told me it was Ernest.
            I have introduced you to every one as Ernest.
            You answer to the name of Ernest. You look as if
            your name was Ernest. You are the most
            earnest-looking person I ever saw in my life. It
            is perfectly absurd your saying that your name
            isn't Ernest. It's on your cards. Here is one of
            them. [Taking it from case.] 'Mr. Ernest
            Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.' I'll keep this as a
            proof that your name is Ernest if ever you
            attempt to deny it to me, or to Gwendolen, or to
            any one else. [Puts the card in his pocket.]

            Jack. Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack
            in the country, and the cigarette case was given
            to me in the country.

            Algernon. Yes, but that does not account for the
            fact that your small Aunt Cecily, who lives at
            Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle. Come,
            old boy, you had much better have the thing out
            at once.

            Jack. My dear Algy, you talk exactly as if you
            were a dentist. It is very vulgar to talk like a
            dentist when one isn't a dentist. It produces a
            false impression.

            Algernon. Well, that is exactly what dentists
            always do. Now, go on! Tell me the whole thing.
            I may mention that I have always suspected you
            of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and
            I am quite sure of it now.

            Jack. Bunburyist? What on earth do you mean by a
            Bunburyist?

            Algernon. I'll reveal to you the meaning of that
            incomparable expression as soon as you are kind
            enough to inform me why you are Ernest in town
            and Jack in the country.

            Jack. Well, produce my cigarette case first.

            Algernon. Here it is. [Hands cigarette case.]
            Now produce your explanation, and pray make it
            improbable. [Sits on sofa.]

            Jack. My dear fellow, there is nothing
            improbable about my explanation at all. In fact
            it's perfectly ordinary. Old Mr. Thomas Cardew,
            who adopted me when I was a little boy, made me
            in his will guardian to his grand-daughter, Miss
            Cecily Cardew. Cecily, who addresses me as her
            uncle from motives of respect that you could not
            possibly appreciate, lives at my place in the
            country under the charge of her admirable
            governess, Miss Prism.

            Algernon. Where is that place in the country, by
            the way?

            Jack. That is nothing to you, dear boy. You are
            not going to be invited . . . I may tell you
            candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.

            Algernon. I suspected that, my dear fellow! I
            have Bunburyed all over Shropshire on two
            separate occasions. Now, go on. Why are you
            Ernest in town and Jack in the country?

            Jack. My dear Algy, I don't know whether you
            will be able to understand my real motives. You
            are hardly serious enough. When one is placed in
            the position of guardian, one has to adopt a
            very high moral tone on all subjects. It's one's
            duty to do so. And as a high moral tone can
            hardly be said to conduce very much to either
            one's health or one's happiness, in order to get
            up to town I have always pretended to have a
            younger brother of the name of Ernest, who lives
            in the Albany, and gets into the most dreadful
            scrapes. That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth
            pure and simple.

            Algernon. The truth is rarely pure and never
            simple. Modern life would be very tedious if it
            were either, and modern literature a complete
            impossibility!

            Jack. That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.

            Algernon. Literary criticism is not your forte,
            my dear fellow. Don't try it. You should leave
            that to people who haven't been at a University.
            They do it so well in the daily papers. What you
            really are is a Bunburyist. I was quite right in
            saying you were a Bunburyist. You are one of the
            most advanced Bunburyists I know.

            Jack. What on earth do you mean?

            Algernon. You have invented a very useful
            younger brother called Ernest, in order that you
            may be able to come up to town as often as you
            like. I have invented an invaluable permanent
            invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be
            able to go down into the country whenever I
            choose. Bunbury is perfectly invaluable. If it
            wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad health,
            for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with
            you at Willis's to- night, for I have been
            really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a
            week.

            Jack. I haven't asked you to dine with me
            anywhere to-night.

            Algernon. I know. You are absurdly careless
            about sending out invitations. It is very
            foolish of you. Nothing annoys people so much as
            not receiving invitations.

            Jack. You had much better dine with your Aunt
            Augusta.

            Algernon. I haven't the smallest intention of
            doing anything of the kind. To begin with, I
            dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite
            enough to dine with one's own relations. In the
            second place, whenever I do dine there I am
            always treated as a member of the family, and
            sent down with either no woman at all, or two.
            In the third place, I know perfectly well whom
            she will place me next to, to-night. She will
            place me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts
            with her own husband across the dinner-table.
            That is not very pleasant. Indeed, it is not
            even decent . . . and that sort of thing is
            enormously on the increase. The amount of women
            in London who flirt with their own husbands is
            perfectly scandalous. It looks so bad. It is
            simply washing one's clean linen in public.
            Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed
            Bunburyist I naturally want to talk to you about
            Bunburying. I want to tell you the rules.

            Jack. I'm not a Bunburyist at all. If Gwendolen
            accepts me, I am going to kill my brother,
            indeed I think I'll kill him in any case. Cecily
            is a little too much interested in him. It is
            rather a bore. So I am going to get rid of
            Ernest. And I strongly advise you to do the same
            with Mr. . . . with your invalid friend who has
            the absurd name.

            Algernon. Nothing will induce me to part with
            Bunbury, and if you ever get married, which
            seems to me extremely problematic, you will be
            very glad to know Bunbury. A man who marries
            without knowing Bunbury has a very tedious time
            of it.

            Jack. That is nonsense. If I marry a charming
            girl like Gwendolen, and she is the only girl I
            ever saw in my life that I would marry, I
            certainly won't want to know Bunbury.

            Algernon. Then your wife will. You don't seem to
            realise, that in married life three is company
            and two is none.

            Jack. [Sententiously.] That, my dear young
            friend, is the theory that the corrupt French
            Drama has been propounding for the last fifty
            years.

            Algernon. Yes; and that the happy English home
            has proved in half the time.

            Jack. For heaven's sake, don't try to be
            cynical. It's perfectly easy to be cynical.

            Algernon. My dear fellow, it isn't easy to be
            anything nowadays. There's such a lot of beastly
            competition about. [The sound of an electric
            bell is heard.] Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.
            Only relatives, or creditors, ever ring in that
            Wagnerian manner. Now, if I get her out of the
            way for ten minutes, so that you can have an
            opportunity for proposing to Gwendolen, may I
            dine with you to-night at Willis's?

            Jack. I suppose so, if you want to.

            Algernon. Yes, but you must be serious about it.
            I hate people who are not serious about meals.
            It is so shallow of them.

       [Enter Lane.]

            Lane. Lady Bracknell and Miss Fairfax.

       [Algernon goes forward to meet them. Enter Lady
       Bracknell and Gwendolen.]

            Lady Bracknell. Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I
            hope you are behaving very well.

            Algernon. I'm feeling very well, Aunt Augusta.

            Lady Bracknell. That's not quite the same thing.
            In fact the two things rarely go together. [Sees
            Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.]

            Algernon. [To Gwendolen.] Dear me, you are
            smart!

            Gwendolen. I am always smart! Am I not, Mr.
            Worthing?

            Jack. You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax.

            Gwendolen. Oh! I hope I am not that. It would
            leave no room for developments, and I intend to
            develop in many directions. [Gwendolen and Jack
            sit down together in the corner.]

            Lady Bracknell. I'm sorry if we are a little
            late, Algernon, but I was obliged to call on
            dear Lady Harbury. I hadn't been there since her
            poor husband's death. I never saw a woman so
            altered; she looks quite twenty years younger.
            And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those
            nice cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

            Algernon. Certainly, Aunt Augusta. [Goes over to
            tea-table.]

            Lady Bracknell. Won't you come and sit here,
            Gwendolen?

            Gwendolen. Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable
            where I am.

            Algernon. [Picking up empty plate in horror.]
            Good heavens! Lane! Why are there no cucumber
            sandwiches? I ordered them specially.

            Lane. [Gravely.] There were no cucumbers in the
            market this morning, sir. I went down twice.

            Algernon. No cucumbers!

            Lane. No, sir. Not even for ready money.

            Algernon. That will do, Lane, thank you.

            Lane. Thank you, sir. [Goes out.]

            Algernon. I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta,
            about there being no cucumbers, not even for
            ready money.

            Lady Bracknell. It really makes no matter,
            Algernon. I had some crumpets with Lady Harbury,
            who seems to me to be living entirely for
            pleasure now.

            Algernon. I hear her hair has turned quite gold
            from grief.

            Lady Bracknell. It certainly has changed its
            colour. From what cause I, of course, cannot
            say. [Algernon crosses and hands tea.] Thank
            you. I've quite a treat for you to-night,
            Algernon. I am going to send you down with Mary
            Farquhar. She is such a nice woman, and so
            attentive to her husband. It's delightful to
            watch them.

            Algernon. I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall
            have to give up the pleasure of dining with you
            to-night after all.

            Lady Bracknell. [Frowning.] I hope not,
            Algernon. It would put my table completely out.
            Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
            Fortunately he is accustomed to that.

            Algernon. It is a great bore, and, I need hardly
            say, a terrible disappointment to me, but the
            fact is I have just had a telegram to say that
            my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again.
            [Exchanges glances with Jack.] They seem to
            think I should be with him.

            Lady Bracknell. It is very strange. This Mr.
            Bunbury seems to suffer from curiously bad
            health.

            Algernon. Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful
            invalid.

            Lady Bracknell. Well, I must say, Algernon, that
            I think it is high time that Mr. Bunbury made up
            his mind whether he was going to live or to die.
            This shilly-shallying with the question is
            absurd. Nor do I in any way approve of the
            modern sympathy with invalids. I consider it
            morbid. Illness of any kind is hardly a thing to
            be encouraged in others. Health is the primary
            duty of life. I am always telling that to your
            poor uncle, but he never seems to take much
            notice . . . as far as any improvement in his
            ailment goes. I should be much obliged if you
            would ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to be kind
            enough not to have a relapse on Saturday, for I
            rely on you to arrange my music for me. It is my
            last reception, and one wants something that
            will encourage conversation, particularly at the
            end of the season when every one has practically
            said whatever they had to say, which, in most
            cases, was probably not much.

            Algernon. I'll speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta,
            if he is still conscious, and I think I can
            promise you he'll be all right by Saturday. Of
            course the music is a great difficulty. You see,
            if one plays good music, people don't listen,
            and if one plays bad music people don't talk.
            But I'll run over the programme I've drawn out,
            if you will kindly come into the next room for a
            moment.

            Lady Bracknell. Thank you, Algernon. It is very
            thoughtful of you. [Rising, and following
            Algernon.] I'm sure the programme will be
            delightful, after a few expurgations. French
            songs I cannot possibly allow. People always
            seem to think that they are improper, and either
            look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which
            is worse. But German sounds a thoroughly
            respectable language, and indeed, I believe is
            so. Gwendolen, you will accompany me.

            Gwendolen. Certainly, mamma.

       [Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room,
       Gwendolen remains behind.]

            Jack. Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.

            Gwendolen. Pray don't talk to me about the
            weather, Mr. Worthing. Whenever people talk to
            me about the weather, I always feel quite
            certain that they mean something else. And that
            makes me so nervous.

            Jack. I do mean something else.

            Gwendolen. I thought so. In fact, I am never
            wrong.

            Jack. And I would like to be allowed to take
            advantage of Lady Bracknell's temporary absence
            . . .

            Gwendolen. I would certainly advise you to do
            so. Mamma has a way of coming back suddenly into
            a room that I have often had to speak to her
            about.

            Jack. [Nervously.] Miss Fairfax, ever since I
            met you I have admired you more than any girl .
            . . I have ever met since . . . I met you.

            Gwendolen. Yes, I am quite well aware of the
            fact. And I often wish that in public, at any
            rate, you had been more demonstrative. For me
            you have always had an irresistible fascination.
            Even before I met you I was far from indifferent
            to you. [Jack looks at her in amazement.] We
            live, as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an
            age of ideals. The fact is constantly mentioned
            in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has
            reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and
            my ideal has always been to love some one of the
            name of Ernest. There is something in that name
            that inspires absolute confidence. The moment
            Algernon first mentioned to me that he had a
            friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to
            love you.

            Jack. You really love me, Gwendolen?

            Gwendolen. Passionately!

            Jack. Darling! You don't know how happy you've
            made me.

            Gwendolen. My own Ernest!

            Jack. But you don't really mean to say that you
            couldn't love me if my name wasn't Ernest?

            Gwendolen. But your name is Ernest.

            Jack. Yes, I know it is. But supposing it was
            something else? Do you mean to say you couldn't
            love me then?

            Gwendolen. [Glibly.] Ah! that is clearly a
            metaphysical speculation, and like most
            metaphysical speculations has very little
            reference at all to the actual facts of real
            life, as we know them.

            Jack. Personally, darling, to speak quite
            candidly, I don't much care about the name of
            Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at
            all.

            Gwendolen. It suits you perfectly. It is a
            divine name. It has a music of its own. It
            produces vibrations.

            Jack. Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I
            think there are lots of other much nicer names.
            I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.

            Gwendolen. Jack? . . . No, there is very little
            music in the name Jack, if any at all, indeed.
            It does not thrill. It produces absolutely no
            vibrations . . . I have known several Jacks, and
            they all, without exception, were more than
            usually plain. Besides, Jack is a notorious
            domesticity for John! And I pity any woman who
            is married to a man called John. She would
            probably never be allowed to know the entrancing
            pleasure of a single moment's solitude. The only
            really safe name is Ernest

            Jack. Gwendolen, I must get christened at
            once--I mean we must get married at once. There
            is no time to be lost.

            Gwendolen. Married, Mr. Worthing?

            Jack. [Astounded.] Well . . . surely. You know
            that I love you, and you led me to believe, Miss
            Fairfax, that you were not absolutely
            indifferent to me.

            Gwendolen. I adore you. But you haven't proposed
            to me yet. Nothing has been said at all about
            marriage. The subject has not even been touched
            on.

            Jack. Well . . . may I propose to you now?

            Gwendolen. I think it would be an admirable
            opportunity. And to spare you any possible
            disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only
            fair to tell you quite frankly before-hand that
            I am fully determined to accept you.

            Jack. Gwendolen!

            Gwendolen. Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got
            to say to me?

            Jack. You know what I have got to say to you.

            Gwendolen. Yes, but you don't say it.

            Jack. Gwendolen, will you marry me? [Goes on his
            knees.]

            Gwendolen. Of course I will, darling. How long
            you have been about it! I am afraid you have had
            very little experience in how to propose.

            Jack. My own one, I have never loved any one in
            the world but you.

            Gwendolen. Yes, but men often propose for
            practice. I know my brother Gerald does. All my
            girl-friends tell me so. What wonderfully blue
            eyes you have, Ernest! They are quite, quite,
            blue. I hope you will always look at me just
            like that, especially when there are other
            people present. [Enter Lady Bracknell.]

            Lady Bracknell. Mr. Worthing! Rise, sir, from
            this semi-recumbent posture. It is most
            indecorous.

            Gwendolen. Mamma! [He tries to rise; she
            restrains him.] I must beg you to retire. This
            is no place for you. Besides, Mr. Worthing has
            not quite finished yet.

            Lady Bracknell. Finished what, may I ask?

            Gwendolen. I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.
            [They rise together.]

            Lady Bracknell. Pardon me, you are not engaged
            to any one. When you do become engaged to some
            one, I, or your father, should his health permit
            him, will inform you of the fact. An engagement
            should come on a young girl as a surprise,
            pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be. It
            is hardly a matter that she could be allowed to
            arrange for herself . . . And now I have a few
            questions to put to you, Mr. Worthing. While I
            am making these inquiries, you, Gwendolen, will
            wait for me below in the carriage.

            Gwendolen. [Reproachfully.] Mamma!

            Lady Bracknell. In the carriage, Gwendolen!
            [Gwendolen goes to the door. She and Jack blow
            kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell's
            back. Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if
            she could not understand what the noise was.
            Finally turns round.] Gwendolen, the carriage!

            Gwendolen. Yes, mamma. [Goes out, looking back
            at Jack.]

            Lady Bracknell. [Sitting down.] You can take a
            seat, Mr. Worthing.

       [Looks in her pocket for note-book and pencil.]

            Jack. Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer
            standing.

            Lady Bracknell. [Pencil and note-book in hand.]
            I feel bound to tell you that you are not down
            on my list of eligible young men, although I
            have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton
            has. We work together, in fact. However, I am
            quite ready to enter your name, should your
            answers be what a really affectionate mother
            requires. Do you smoke?

            Jack. Well, yes, I must admit I smoke.

            Lady Bracknell. I am glad to hear it. A man
            should always have an occupation of some kind.
            There are far too many idle men in London as it
            is. How old are you?

            Jack. Twenty-nine.

            Lady Bracknell. A very good age to be married
            at. I have always been of opinion that a man who
            desires to get married should know either
            everything or nothing. Which do you know?

            Jack. [After some hesitation.] I know nothing,
            Lady Bracknell.

            Lady Bracknell. I am pleased to hear it. I do
            not approve of anything that tampers with
            natural ignorance. Ignorance is like a delicate
            exotic fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone.
            The whole theory of modern education is
            radically unsound. Fortunately in England, at
            any rate, education produces no effect
            whatsoever. If it did, it would prove a serious
            danger to the upper classes, and probably lead
            to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square. What is
            your income?

            Jack. Between seven and eight thousand a year.

            Lady Bracknell. [Makes a note in her book.] In
            land, or in investments?

            Jack. In investments, chiefly.

            Lady Bracknell. That is satisfactory. What
            between the duties expected of one during one's
            lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after
            one's death, land has ceased to be either a
            profit or a pleasure. It gives one position, and
            prevents one from keeping it up. That's all that
            can be said about land.

            Jack. I have a country house with some land, of
            course, attached to it, about fifteen hundred
            acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for
            my real income. In fact, as far as I can make
            out, the poachers are the only people who make
            anything out of it.

            Lady Bracknell. A country house! How many
            bedrooms? Well, that point can be cleared up
            afterwards. You have a town house, I hope? A
            girl with a simple, unspoiled nature, like
            Gwendolen, could hardly be expected to reside in
            the country.

            Jack. Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square,
            but it is let by the year to Lady Bloxham. Of
            course, I can get it back whenever I like, at
            six months' notice.

            Lady Bracknell. Lady Bloxham? I don't know her.

            Jack. Oh, she goes about very little. She is a
            lady considerably advanced in years.

            Lady Bracknell. Ah, nowadays that is no
            guarantee of respectability of character. What
            number in Belgrave Square?

            Jack. 149.

            Lady Bracknell. [Shaking her head.] The
            unfashionable side. I thought there was
            something. However, that could easily be
            altered.

            Jack. Do you mean the fashion, or the side?

            Lady Bracknell. [Sternly.] Both, if necessary, I
            presume. What are your politics?

            Jack. Well, I am afraid I really have none. I am
            a Liberal Unionist.

            Lady Bracknell. Oh, they count as Tories. They
            dine with us. Or come in the evening, at any
            rate. Now to minor matters. Are your parents
            living?

            Jack. I have lost both my parents.

            Lady Bracknell. To lose one parent, Mr.
            Worthing, may be regarded as a misfortune; to
            lose both looks like carelessness. Who was your
            father? He was evidently a man of some wealth.
            Was he born in what the Radical papers call the
            purple of commerce, or did he rise from the
            ranks of the aristocracy?

            Jack. I am afraid I really don't know. The fact
            is, Lady Bracknell, I said I had lost my
            parents. It would be nearer the truth to say
            that my parents seem to have lost me . . . I
            don't actually know who I am by birth. I was . .
            . well, I was found.

            Lady Bracknell. Found!

            Jack. The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old
            gentleman of a very charitable and kindly
            disposition, found me, and gave me the name of
            Worthing, because he happened to have a
            first-class ticket for Worthing in his pocket at
            the time. Worthing is a place in Sussex. It is a
            seaside resort.

            Lady Bracknell. Where did the charitable
            gentleman who had a first-class ticket for this
            seaside resort find you?

            Jack. [Gravely.] In a hand-bag.

            Lady Bracknell. A hand-bag?

            Jack. [Very seriously.] Yes, Lady Bracknell. I
            was in a hand-bag--a somewhat large, black
            leather hand-bag, with handles to it--an
            ordinary hand-bag in fact.

            Lady Bracknell. In what locality did this Mr.
            James, or Thomas, Cardew come across this
            ordinary hand-bag?

            Jack. In the cloak-room at Victoria Station. It
            was given to him in mistake for his own.

            Lady Bracknell. The cloak-room at Victoria
            Station?

            Jack. Yes. The Brighton line.

            Lady Bracknell. The line is immaterial. Mr.
            Worthing, I confess I feel somewhat bewildered
            by what you have just told me. To be born, or at
            any rate bred, in a hand-bag, whether it had
            handles or not, seems to me to display a
            contempt for the ordinary decencies of family
            life that reminds one of the worst excesses of
            the French Revolution. And I presume you know
            what that unfortunate movement led to? As for
            the particular locality in which the hand-bag
            was found, a cloak-room at a railway station
            might serve to conceal a social
            indiscretion--has probably, indeed, been used
            for that purpose before now--but it could hardly
            be regarded as an assured basis for a recognised
            position in good society.

            Jack. May I ask you then what you would advise
            me to do? I need hardly say I would do anything
            in the world to ensure Gwendolen's happiness.

            Lady Bracknell. I would strongly advise you, Mr.
            Worthing, to try and acquire some relations as
            soon as possible, and to make a definite effort
            to produce at any rate one parent, of either
            sex, before the season is quite over.

            Jack. Well, I don't see how I could possibly
            manage to do that. I can produce the hand-bag at
            any moment. It is in my dressing-room at home. I
            really think that should satisfy you, Lady
            Bracknell.

            Lady Bracknell. Me, sir! What has it to do with
            me? You can hardly imagine that I and Lord
            Bracknell would dream of allowing our only
            daughter--a girl brought up with the utmost
            care--to marry into a cloak- room, and form an
            alliance with a parcel? Good morning, Mr.
            Worthing!

       [Lady Bracknell sweeps out in majestic indignation.]

            Jack. Good morning! [Algernon, from the other
            room, strikes up the Wedding March. Jack looks
            perfectly furious, and goes to the door.] For
            goodness' sake don't play that ghastly tune,
            Algy. How idiotic you are!

       [The music stops and Algernon enters cheerily.]

            Algernon. Didn't it go off all right, old boy?
            You don't mean to say Gwendolen refused you? I
            know it is a way she has. She is always refusing
            people. I think it is most ill-natured of her.

            Jack. Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet. As
            far as she is concerned, we are engaged. Her
            mother is perfectly unbearable. Never met such a
            Gorgon . . . I don't really know what a Gorgon
            is like, but I am quite sure that Lady Bracknell
            is one. In any case, she is a monster, without
            being a myth, which is rather unfair . . . I beg
            your pardon, Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk
            about your own aunt in that way before you.

            Algernon. My dear boy, I love hearing my
            relations abused. It is the only thing that
            makes me put up with them at all. Relations are
            simply a tedious pack of people, who haven't got
            the remotest knowledge of how to live, nor the
            smallest instinct about when to die.

            Jack. Oh, that is nonsense!

            Algernon. It isn't!

            Jack. Well, I won't argue about the matter. You
            always want to argue about things.

            Algernon. That is exactly what things were
            originally made for.

            Jack. Upon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot
            myself . . . [A pause.] You don't think there is
            any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother
            in about a hundred and fifty years, do you,
            Algy?

            Algernon. All women become like their mothers.
            That is their tragedy. No man does. That's his.

            Jack. Is that clever?

            Algernon. It is perfectly phrased! and quite as
            true as any observation in civilised life should
            be.

            Jack. I am sick to death of cleverness.
            Everybody is clever nowadays. You can't go
            anywhere without meeting clever people. The
            thing has become an absolute public nuisance. I
            wish to goodness we had a few fools left.

            Algernon. We have.

            Jack. I should extremely like to meet them. What
            do they talk about?

            Algernon. The fools? Oh! about the clever
            people, of course.

            Jack. What fools!

            Algernon. By the way, did you tell Gwendolen the
            truth about your being Ernest in town, and Jack
            in the country?

            Jack. [In a very patronising manner.] My dear
            fellow, the truth isn't quite the sort of thing
            one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl. What
            extraordinary ideas you have about the way to
            behave to a woman!

            Algernon. The only way to behave to a woman is
            to make love to her, if she is pretty, and to
            some one else, if she is plain.

            Jack. Oh, that is nonsense.

            Algernon. What about your brother? What about
            the profligate Ernest?

            Jack. Oh, before the end of the week I shall
            have got rid of him. I'll say he died in Paris
            of apoplexy. Lots of people die of apoplexy,
            quite suddenly, don't they?

            Algernon. Yes, but it's hereditary, my dear
            fellow. It's a sort of thing that runs in
            families. You had much better say a severe
            chill.

            Jack. You are sure a severe chill isn't
            hereditary, or anything of that kind?

            Algernon. Of course it isn't!

            Jack. Very well, then. My poor brother Ernest to
            carried off suddenly, in Paris, by a severe
            chill. That gets rid of him.

            Algernon. But I thought you said that . . . Miss
            Cardew was a little too much interested in your
            poor brother Ernest? Won't she feel his loss a
            good deal?

            Jack. Oh, that is all right. Cecily is not a
            silly romantic girl, I am glad to say. She has
            got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and
            pays no attention at all to her lessons.

            Algernon. I would rather like to see Cecily.

            Jack. I will take very good care you never do.
            She is excessively pretty, and she is only just
            eighteen.

            Algernon. Have you told Gwendolen yet that you
            have an excessively pretty ward who is only just
            eighteen?

            Jack. Oh! one doesn't blurt these things out to
            people. Cecily and Gwendolen are perfectly
            certain to be extremely great friends. I'll bet
            you anything you like that half an hour after
            they have met, they will be calling each other
            sister.

            Algernon. Women only do that when they have
            called each other a lot of other things first.
            Now, my dear boy, if we want to get a good table
            at Willis's, we really must go and dress. Do you
            know it is nearly seven?

            Jack. [Irritably.] Oh! It always is nearly
            seven.

            Algernon. Well, I'm hungry.

            Jack. I never knew you when you weren't . . .

            Algernon. What shall we do after dinner? Go to a
            theatre?

            Jack. Oh no! I loathe listening.

            Algernon. Well, let us go to the Club?

            Jack. Oh, no! I hate talking.

            Algernon. Well, we might trot round to the
            Empire at ten?

            Jack. Oh, no! I can't bear looking at things. It
            is so silly.

            Algernon. Well, what shall we do?

            Jack. Nothing!

            Algernon. It is awfully hard work doing nothing.
            However, I don't mind hard work where there is
            no definite object of any kind.

       [Enter Lane.]

            Lane. Miss Fairfax.

       [Enter Gwendolen. Lane goes out.]

            Algernon. Gwendolen, upon my word!

            Gwendolen. Algy, kindly turn your back. I have
            something very particular to say to Mr.
            Worthing.

            Algernon. Really, Gwendolen, I don't think I can
            allow this at all.

            Gwendolen. Algy, you always adopt a strictly
            immoral attitude towards life. You are not quite
            old enough to do that. [Algernon retires to the
            fireplace.]

            Jack. My own darling!

            Gwendolen. Ernest, we may never be married. From
            the expression on mamma's face I fear we never
            shall. Few parents nowadays pay any regard to
            what their children say to them. The
            old-fashioned respect for the young is fast
            dying out. Whatever influence I ever had over
            mamma, I lost at the age of three. But although
            she may prevent us from becoming man and wife,
            and I may marry some one else, and marry often,
            nothing that she can possibly do can alter my
            eternal devotion to you.

            Jack. Dear Gwendolen!

            Gwendolen. The story of your romantic origin, as
            related to me by mamma, with unpleasing
            comments, has naturally stirred the deeper
            fibres of my nature. Your Christian name has an
            irresistible fascination. The simplicity of your
            character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible
            to me. Your town address at the Albany I have.
            What is your address in the country?

            Jack. The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire.

            [Algernon, who has been carefully listening,
            smiles to himself, and writes the address on his
            shirt-cuff. Then picks up the Railway Guide.]

            Gwendolen. There is a good postal service, I
            suppose? It may be necessary to do something
            desperate. That of course will require serious
            consideration. I will communicate with you
            daily.

            Jack. My own one!

            Gwendolen. How long do you remain in town?

            Jack. Till Monday.

            Gwendolen. Good! Algy, you may turn round now.

            Algernon. Thanks, I've turned round already.

            Gwendolen. You may also ring the bell.

            Jack. You will let me see you to your carriage,
            my own darling?

            Gwendolen. Certainly.

            Jack. [To Lane, who now enters.] I will see Miss
            Fairfax out.

            Lane. Yes, sir. [Jack and Gwendolen go off.]

       [Lane presents several letters on a salver to
       Algernon. It is to be surmised that they are bills,
       as Algernon, after looking at the envelopes, tears
       them up.]

            Algernon. A glass of sherry, Lane.

            Lane. Yes, sir.

            Algernon. To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

            Lane. Yes, sir.

            Algernon. I shall probably not be back till
            Monday. You can put up my dress clothes, my
            smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .

            Lane. Yes, sir. [Handing sherry.]

            Algernon. I hope to-morrow will be a fine day,
            Lane.

            Lane. It never is, sir.

            Algernon. Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

            Lane. I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

       [Enter Jack. Lane goes off.]

            Jack. There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the
            only girl I ever cared for in my life. [Algernon
            is laughing immoderately.] What on earth are you
            so amused at?

            Algernon. Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor
            Bunbury, that is all.

            Jack. If you don't take care, your friend
            Bunbury will get you into a serious scrape some
            day.

            Algernon. I love scrapes. They are the only
            things that are never serious.

            Jack. Oh, that's nonsense, Algy. You never talk
            anything but nonsense.

            Algernon. Nobody ever does.

       [Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.
       Algernon lights a cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff,
       and smiles.]

                 ACT DROP
